---
layout: post
title: TYPO3nglish
redirect_from:
  - /blog/typo3nglish.html
tags:
  - community  
---

It's a common topic in the TYPO3 community. As German take quite a big part of the TYPO3 community it makes sense that a
lot of resources are available in german. Everyone understands this for historical reasons, but there's also a big shout
for a change by a lot of people.

Too bad twitter is used for this discussion a lot, and 140 chars is by far not enough to express yourself, especially if
the topic easily offends people. I mostly try to stay away form this discussion on the internet, and only mention it
face to face as it's far easier to manage the response. But as I see the discussion happen a lot more lately I want to
blog about my personal point of view in this regard.

Last week I had a great experience. We had a codesprint in Denmark, with a big group of friends. We had multiple
nationalities, people from Cambodja, United States, Denmark, The Netherlands, Russia, Suisse and Germany (and maybe even
more countries) came together. Of course the main language is english on such events. And of course the dutch sometimes
spoke dutch, and the german spoke german. Just when non-german people came along and took part in the conversation the
language was switched to english.

All sounds really good right? :-) But hey, we ain't living in a perfect world. Not everybody finds it easy to speak
english, and not everybody keeps speaking english when they get tired. And it's of course harder for a big group of
german to speak english if the majority of people around them is german speaking.

Last week this situation was named 'German language prison' on the internet. And that sounds true, although I can
honestly understand that this sounds harsh to german. Especially when they try to do their best to be open and speak
english. But still those people sometimes talk german as soon as the last non-german speaking guy around turns away from
the conversation. Is that bad? Yes, it is... Hearing german all around you gives you the feeling you don't belong to the
same group as the people around you. That's a simple fact.

And then we've the people who claim we should not focus on the past but do better in the future. Also true, but isn't
that really naive? We can't give the full world the feeling being welcome by saying we'll try our best to speak / post
english. We say that for a long time now.

In my opinion the german language prison indeed exists, and nobody should deny that. Especially not the German people
who don't have the experience of joining an event where everyone speaks a language you don't know. Of course we can do
better in the future, and we should. But we should not close our eyes for the problem that exists today. The TYPO3
community can not open up by just the non german people, we need everybody on deck. Does that mean no german is allowed
anymore? No! Of course not. But when you're on an event think about how you would feel if everybody around you speaks a
language you don't know and all seem to have a lot of fun. And when you write a tutorial, think about the audience you
want to reach. And yes, it's for the better of TYPO3 if you take the time to translate it, or ask someone to do so for
you.

And then just for clarity: I understand quite some german, so to me it's not the biggest issue around. But it still
gives me an awkward outsider feeling once in a while. I can really understand that people will not use TYPO3 because of
the language in which they seem to find answers on the internet. And that's really a signal our german friends have to
understand. And that's really all, because if you understand that you will act. And acting is done to capability. This
will as such not mean that every english speaking german will post multilanguage blogs. And all the non german speaking
community members: give our german friends a break. You are not in the position to demand community members to speak /
post in english (and I don't talk about official events in this case of course :p ).

So, let's have respect and let your heart speak. Speak TYPO3... Speak TYPO3nglish ok?