---
layout: post
title: My wishes for 2017
redirect_from:
  - /blog/my-wishes-for-2017.html
tags:
  - personal
  - community
---

Years ago I started contributing to open source products. I've met awesome people, I learned a lot myself, and I hope
my contributions lead to a lot of other people learning and enjoying open source. But something became a silent assassin
of my motivation, and I just need to get that out. I didn't always keep my mouth shut, but there're many occasions I
did, but ignoring a problem doesn't make it go away.

Before I continue I'd like to sketch some context about myself as a human being. Every human being has a personality,
and so do I. It's one I need to deal with, and one with strong points and also weaker points. There's small things that
affect me in a way I can't control. I'm sensitive to small details in tone, face expressions, disappearing people or
people becoming silent and overruled, all kind of stuff... I pick up minor signals that in most occurrences are true
things, but in some cases I'm also completely wrong. But in all cases I've problems closing and protecting myself. This
means minor things add up, and I keep processing them. Positive side effect: it lead to a habit to search for the deeper
question behind situations.

As an example I'd like to take a current discussion in the Netherlands. It's about "Zwarte Piet", or in english "Black
Pete". There are people that relate him/her to slavery, racism, being touched in their humanity, and so on. But others
just see him as a tradition, and a nice memory of a special celebration meant for kids. It's a discussion in which
people take position. Some extreme, some less extreme. The discussion is going on for a few years now, and this year I
realised that I considered to skip the "Saint Nicholas" celebration at all because I'm tired of the discussion. This
would've meant denying my kids a party they look forward to for months... But why am I tired of the discussion? Not
because I disagree to either of the arguments, but because I think it's the wrong discussion... I'd like to quote a
professor that said the following about countries being sued for warcrimes. He said something in the line of "If victims
need to sue a country for warcrimes done to their ancestors there are no winners. Even winning the lawsuit will not give
satisfaction that really answers to the pain the people felt.". I personally do not relate "Black Pete" to slavery, but
I do take a stand against slavery. If people are hurt by my ignorance about a possibly historic offspring of "Black
Pete", then who am I to take a stand against that and not adapt in some way to find a compromise? But far more
important: what can I do to lead by example to the people around me by accepting everybody being white, black, purple,
gay, shy, and so on...

I give this example because it's a bit easier to take such an 'extreme' example as people can see it as a real thing. In
communities I often see people ignoring the smaller things (like offensive jokes) by waving them away. By saying "you
shouldn't take it negatively". No, it's the other way around... The main responsibility for what has been said is with
the sender! Once someone said to me on an open source event: "Freedom of speech does not exist without taking the
responsibility for what you say.". And that's true, really really true. And that responsibility goes beyond the obvious
direct effects of a message. I'm not saying people are willingly giving sending negative messages, but I do say people
should think more about the receiving end of the message...

Over the last years I've seen too many people silently going away. People being shy, and having a fear of sending in a
pull request. People that have the feeling not being good enough to contribute, people... And for all those that now
think I talk about a single community: nope, I don't! And I read other people stating exactly the same about communities
I've never been part of, and I see the same happening in real life.

I guess this you can all relate to in some way. But I'd like to take it a little step further. Can we all stop bashing
products? As open source people on social media, as speaker on conferences, as real life people in our discussions...
but also as sales persons/suppliers? My mother used to say: "If you talk negatively about other people it says a lot
about yourself". I think that's also true for suppliers that deliver product A and don't have any knowledge about
product B, but still dare to sell product A by saying "product B is a bad product because <insert some nonsense argument
here>". To me it's a sign they're not convinced enough by their own product, but if that's true: why are you selling it?
Over the last months I again hear people questioning budget applications made years ago. Again I had the feeling I
needed to defend other people in a community because they were directly attacked. I thought about that a bit longer, and
I can only find a few arguments those people would still do that today... Maybe they've the feeling they were unheard
while that budget application was approved. Maybe they've a financial gain by product A and think they can sell it
better by putting product B into a negative perspective. Maybe there's even a political (power) related argument. But at
least there's no social interaction, it's taking a stand against the other.

In some cases I'm ashamed about people that walk around in certain communities, even at official positions. People
('officials') that have clearly stated being willing to hurt projects that have their offsprings in the community they
represent for example. People with not just a 'personal' and a 'business' agenda, but somehow manage to walk around with
multiple personalities and switch at will for their own gain or position... It kept me back, it demotivates me and it's
a disabler for contributions (and the people behind).

Why am I writing this all? Well, basically because I don't care about my own position at all, but do care about people
that are hurt by things covered by a "Ignorance is bliss" blanket. I'm tired of suppliers that need to damage other
products to sell their own, it's such a sign of weakness. It's a time in which we've a chance, a time in which loads of
people silently contribute. There's a lot of possibilities, thrilling new technologies and stunning people around. Let's
stop forcing solutions to customers, let's listen to the questions asked and solve the real problems behind by finding
the right tool for the job!

In the ending days of 2016 it might be good to have express wishes for 2017. I hereby wish more people thinking about
the tone of things they say. I wish people will think more about the fact that their "Black Pete" could be perceived
completely different by their neighbour. That people will write down "funny remarks" first, and replace the topic by
something awful and verify if the joke becomes offensive... Sprinkle some world peace on top and we'll have an awesome
year!
